Denoising Diffusion Policy Optimization (#508)
huggingface/trl: docs/source/ddpo_trainer.mdx

> # Credits

Reviewer: Can you only add the title with a top level section (`#`) with the title being `Denoising Diffusion Policy Optimization` and then adjusting the subsections accordingly? I have a slight preference to put credits/references at the end of the document but no strong opinion.

- `image` : The image generated by the Stable Diffusion model

Example code for logging sampled images with `wandb` is given below.

```python
# for logging these images to wandb

def image_outputs_hook(image_data, global_step, accelerate_logger):
    # For the sake of this example, we only care about the last batch
    # hence we extract the last element of the list
    result = {}
    images, prompts, _, rewards, _ = image_data[-1]
    for i, image in enumerate(images):
        pil = Image.fromarray(
            (image.cpu().numpy().transpose(1, 2, 0) * 255).astype(np.uint8)
        )
        pil = pil.resize((256, 256))
        result[f"{prompts[i]:.25} | {rewards[i]:.2f}"] = [pil]
    accelerate_logger.log_images(
        result,
        step=global_step,
    )

```

> 

Reviewer: We had some requests recently to also show how to use the model after training. Could you add a small snippet that given the user pushed the model to the hub how it can be loaded and an image generated?

Reviewer: I think in the example you could link your trained model!

# Denoising Diffusion Policy Optimization
## The why

| Before | After DDPO finetuning |
| --- | --- |
| ![Pre squirrel](/resources/images/pre_squirrel.png) | ![Post squirrel](/resources/images/post_squirrel.png) |
| ![Pre crab](/resources/images/pre_crab.png) | ![Post crab](/resources/images/post_crab.png) |

> | ![Pre starfish](/resources/images/pre_starfish.png) | ![Post starfish](/resources/images/post_starfish.png) |

Reviewer 2: I pushed the images here: https://huggingface.co/datasets/trl-internal-testing/example-images/tree/main/images can you update the links with the ones on the Hub, similarly as https://github.com/huggingface/trl/blob/main/docs/source/detoxifying_a_lm.mdx#L86 for example

> | ![Pre starfish](/resources/images/pre_starfish.png) | ![Post starfish](/resources/images/post_starfish.png) |

Reviewer 2: I kept the same filenames: so replacing `/resources/images/xxxx` by `https://huggingface.co/datasets/trl-internal-testing/example-images/resolve/main/images/xxxx` should do the trick
<img width="898" alt="Screenshot 2023-08-21 at 11 40 25" src="https://github.com/huggingface/trl/assets/49240599/30e5a156-cde8-45de-842d-3aeaf5edfba4">

# Credits

This work is heavily influenced by the repo [here](https://github.com/kvablack/ddpo-pytorch) and the associated [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13301).

# Getting started with Stable Diffusion finetuning with reinforcement learning

> The machinery for finetuning of Stable Diffusion models with reinforcement learning makes heavy use of HuggingFace's `diffuser`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The machinery for finetuning of Stable Diffusion models with reinforcement learning makes heavy use of HuggingFace's `diffusers`
```

> library. A reason for  stating this is that getting started requires a bit of familiarity with the `diffuser` library concepts, mainly two of them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
library. A reason for  stating this is that getting started requires a bit of familiarity with the `diffusers` library concepts, mainly two of them.
```

> The machinery for finetuning of Stable Diffusion models with reinforcement learning makes heavy use of HuggingFace's `diffusers`
> library. A reason for  stating this is that getting started requires a bit of familiarity with the `diffusers` library concepts, mainly two of them.
> `Pipeline` and `Scheduler`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

The machinery for finetuning of Stable Diffusion models with reinforcement learning makes heavy use of HuggingFace's `diffusers`
library. A reason for  stating this is that getting started requires a bit of familiarity with the `diffusers` library concepts, mainly two of them - pipelines and schedulers.
```

Right out of the box (`diffusers` library), there isn't a `Pipeline` nor a `Scheduler` instance that is suitable for finetuning with reinforcement learning. Some adjustments need to made. 

> There is an interface that is provided by this library that are required to be implemented in order to be use the `DDPOTrainer`, which is the main machinery for finetuning. 
> There is a default implementation of this interface that you can use out of the box. Assuming the default implementation is sufficient and/or to get thing moving, refer to the training example alongside this readme. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is an interface that is provided by this library that is required to be implemented to be used with the `DDPOTrainer`, which is the main machinery for fine-tuning Stable Diffusion with reinforcement learning. 
There is a default implementation of this interface that you can use out of the box. Assuming the default implementation is sufficient and/or to get things moving, refer to the training example alongside this guide. 
```

While there is an explicit class interface for the pipeline, the scheduler is constrained by a method signature associated with the pipeline class. The trainer will attempt to get the scheduler
via this pipeline associated method rather than directly. This was the most minimal way forward and the only constraint is that a particular required output type.

> For a more detailed look into the interface and the default scheduler and pipeline implementation, go [here](https://github.com/lvwerra/trl/models/modelling_sd_base.py)

Reviewer 3: I think the absolute URL needs to be corrected here.

> Also in addition, there is the expectation of providing a reward function and a prompt function. The reward function is used to evaluate the generated images  and the prompt function is used to generate the prompts that are used to generate the images.

Reviewer 3: If we're fine-tuning on a dataset of image-caption pairs, then why do we need the prompt generation function?

Author: I may have not understood the question properly but while finetuning on a dataset of image-caption pairs is possible though indirectly, we're counting on the reward function to be the main force behind the fine-tuning.  It feels like I'm preaching to the choir, so not sure what I'm missing here

> # Setting up the image logging hook function

Reviewer 3: Since this is still the beginning of the document, I would first show the readers a minimal run down of the commands needed to use the trainer. Then I would proceed to this.

Expect the function to be given a list of lists of the form
```python
[[image, prompt, prompt_metadata, rewards], ...]

```
and `image`, `prompt`, `prompt_metadata`, `rewards` are batched.
The last list in the lists of lists represents the last sample batch. You are likely to want to log this one
While you are free to log however you want the use of `wandb` or `tensorboard` is recommended.

> Example code for logging sampled images with `wandb` is given below.

Reviewer 3: Worth explaining what `prompt_metadata` and `rewards` are.

```python
# for logging these images to wandb

def image_outputs_hook(image_data, global_step, accelerate_logger):
    # extract the last one
    result = {}
    images, prompts, _, rewards = image_data[-1]
    for i, image in enumerate(images):
        pil = Image.fromarray(
            (image.cpu().numpy().transpose(1, 2, 0) * 255).astype(np.uint8)
        )
        pil = pil.resize((256, 256))
        result[f"{prompts[i]:.25} | {rewards[i]:.2f}"] = [pil]
    accelerate_logger.log_images(
        result,
        step=global_step,
    )

```

`DDPOConfig` is the config object type. Most of the configuration params have defaults. The following are things to keep in mind (The code checks this for you as well)

- The configurable sample batch size should be greater than or equal to self.config.train_batch_size
- The configurable sample batch size must be divisible by the configurable train batch size
- The configurable sample batch size must be divisible by both the configurable gradient accumulation steps and the configurable accelerator processes count

> For a working example please refer to `stable_diffusion_tuning.py` in the `examples/scripts` directory.

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we also include links that show the reader how to use the `stable_diffusion_tuning.py` script to get a run started?
